1920s.

The horror comes from seeing the damage of the class system up close and having to deal with the hermetically sealed perspective of the English middle classes. Perhaps it’s not a great surprise that the English people I have liked and got on with the best over the years are artistically inclined, have travelled a lot - or are cyclists.


Fundraising stamp from 1939.
In the middle of this busy period of adjustment Steph’s illness returned. If we had been anywhere else in the world it would have meant an aggressive course of chemo and a poor long term prognosis. But we were lucky. Her consultant at St Barts Hospital (founded 1123), an aging pioneer complete with bow tie and nose that looked like it had its own port ration, slipped her onto a trial of something called a monoclonal antibody. At the time this was new territory and involved using modified mice protein to artificially do what the body does naturally – tag cancer cells for destruction. The treatment was four infusions of this over a month. Steph got a mild cold, that was the extent of her symptoms.

Six months after that she was given a tentative all clear. Being on a trial she had enough blood samples taken out of her to keep a colony of vampires alive, but aside from that it was about as close to a secular miracle as you can get.

When it became clear that Steph would be ok we took the unprecedented move of buying a flat out at the far end of the Victoria line, in the down at heel suburb of Walthamstow. This was back when you could get a 95% loan and, by using all of Steph’s savings (I didn’t have any) we could just afford something that needed a bit of work. Now suddenly, I co-owned a piece of a future. I am not sure I was expecting a future, or that I had had really looked much further out than simply being here with (and for) Steph.


I am writing this, some thirteen years later, on a desk in that first floor window. Google kindly included our first ever car in the photo too.
So cycling and buying bikes wasn’t a priority, it was commuting only. But I absolutely loved it. Ripping through the traffic on my rat bike was a total joy. Crossing the Thames twice a day, seeing how the wind and tides were working, passing by the huge variety of shops, learning the streets to the point I could leave the A-Z behind, looking at the people and just being here was often fantastic.

The built environment of London is endlessly fascinating and because the riding was so demanding I really enjoyed it. The variety of roads and turns and traffic and views you get in 12 miles in London is extraordinary and, on a good day, bustling your bike down through the tight turns at the back of Clerkenwell, was utterly magic.

London has nothing like the epic weather-watching vistas of Wellington, but as an example of the variety here are four slices of London. They are all in the same 5 minutes of riding on my standard commute route into central London.


Occasionally I would take the bike down into the The City on the weekend and just loop around the back streets seeking out alleys and blue plaques, indulging in the pleasure of putting a map of complex city in your head and body – turning it from a series of lines on a map to an experience, making that bit of ‘London brain’ bigger.

Commuting had helped me go from being a skeptic to being a baby Londoner. It had taken a while, if I hadn’t had a reason to push through that first two years I would have been back to NZ in a shot, but now I had a mortgage and a life and, most importantly, a healthy not-wife.

What I didn’t have was an existence outside of London, but all that was about to change.

Next: Horizons
