It's not often you get road rage as a cyclist. The twice I remember getting it in the last ten years have both been because I was stupidly undertaken while wiating at lights by cyclist going at speed illegally through intersections. When I say undertaken I mean could feel the air compress around me as they passed. On both occasions I chased down the riders and gave them a mouthful. Of course they abused me back but my only aim in those circumstances is to make them think twice about doing it again. I resisted the urge to use racing dirty tricks and bump them or do the dreaded rear wheel 'hook'. No, I was good.

I haven't always been so good. In the deeper past I have done things I am not particularly proud of including putting my cleated boot into a taxi door when he turned out in front of me from a side street knowing that I was coming towards him. He was so close to hitting me that unclipping and smashing my foot into him while heavily braking was easy. Lots of slapping cars as they pass too close - a slap is good because they think they have hit you when you have hit them.

But I have stopped all that. I don't shout, I don't slap, I certainly don't put my boot into the sides of cars anymore.

All because of two incidents that happened within a few weeks of each other on a small innocous piece of quiet back road in Walthamstow.

I had succumbed to nostalgia and bought a cheap old 80s steel frame for £25, a Raleigh racer, and had turned it into an easy going single speed city bike. Very basic - a pair of brakes, one gear. It was interesting going back in time - the frame, despite being a quality racing frame with a terrible old paint job, was not a patch on the Kinesis for speed or weight, though it did have that special steel 'spring' that purists love.


So, too Pretoria Avenue, a narrow local road in Walthamstow that I used to get to Baxters nursery from the south. It had been a classic 'duck and dive' two-way London street. There are thousands on these in London, streets too narrow for two cars to pass but still two-way, usually lined with cars on one or both sides. The way to approach them as a driver is to tuck into gaps bwteen parked cars and wait for the other driver to pass - narrowly - to one side. After a few years it becomes second nature, but after the broad roads of down under it feels insane!

Around 2010 Pretoria Avenue was made one way, luckily for me in the direction I needed. However the signage indicating the change was very poor, you can see the signs that were added at the time below - not exactly forceful.

So there were bound to be a couple of people who got it wrong and, through force of habit, turned left into the now one-way street and merrily drive up it.

Can you see where this is going?

So the first one to drive straight at me while I was riding the right way down the middle of a one-way street was a scooter rider. To have a scooter rider hurtle at you at 30mph is unnerving to say the least. As I saw him approach I started to wave my right arm to make my presence known - I thought he was going to ride straight through me. He moved to the side just in time, a manouver that would have been dangerous even had the road been two-way. So I shouted at him as he passed - a few choice short and crisp anglo saxon words that Australians like to use in such circumstances. An aside; Australians swear more because the accent, with its elongated vowels, makes swearing so enjoyable.

I rode on, shaking my head. So far this had been a fairly average road incident, the kind of thing that you would expect to have once or twice a year.  After I exited the one-way and came to turn at the next intersection I heard the rattle of a scooter behind me. It was the guy who had just avoided me.

Riding in London you soon learn to read the sound of scooters. If they are being ridden like they are F1 motorbikes, with throttles being gunned, then it's a safe bet that it's a stolen scooter being ridden for fun by some small time crim. I have had this kind of person ride beside me, gunning their engines and zig-zagging closer and closer. Prior to this year the best thing in those circumstances is just to keep riding steadily and don't look them in the eyes. The best place to look is at the end of their handlebars, because that's what you want to nudge with your body if they get too close. As of this year with acid attacks from scooters getting more common the best thing to do is get off the road. And if there are more than one of these the best thing is to get off the road as quickly as you can - if you get small time crims in packs then they egg each other on and can be extremely dangerous. They are out to 'have fun', and if they are travelling pillion then it's possible they are out stealing other scooters or bikes, so beware.

Anyway, this scotter didn't have that sound. It was being ridden steadily if quickly, so I wasn't too worried about being jumped by 'yoff'. I pulled over to a stop and said something along the lines of 'what the hell do you think you were doing you idiot that is a one way street.' though with a little more colour. At which point he reached over and punched me in the face, turned, and rode away.

A bit of an over reaction I would have thought.

There's a little something that I do to amuse myself, a habit since courier days, and that is memorising number plates very quickly. It's quite handy to be able to quote a number plate back at someone who has just wronged you as you then put them on notice that they will be accountable.

So I immediately put the guys plate details in my phone. There was one witness, an old guy lying on the pavement off his face on something. Crack, meth, what was thr drug of choice in 2010? I would have said alcoholic but the teeth and gums had that caved, skeltal look. I went to talk to him and he literally burbled at me. Completely incoherent. Brilliant.

Shaken, but not too badly, I continued to nursery, picked Baxter up then phoned the assault report in. A cop came around, took my statement and the license plate. I wasn't hoping for a conviction of anything as there were no witnesses, but at least a cop turning up his door and asking questions would be something.

Turns out the plate was fake. The police went to the registered address of the plates and there was not even a house there. Ghost plates. A stolen bike, untaxed and uninsured, completely untraceable.

So much for remembering plate numbers.

Round two was very different, though it started exactly the same. Same road, same time of day, same bike.

This time a blue car, something like a honda Accord can haring up the road towards me going the wrong way. I started waving, though it became clear that the driver was not going to be swerving. Something to do with the metallic paint and darkened windows. I pulled out of the way just in time, I think I may have had to flick up onto the left footpath. It was very close, outrageously close, so close I could reach out and tap his car on the roof. A gentle reminder there was a person there. So I slapped the roof, not even very hard, as he sped past.

I continued on my way, turned right onto main road after waiting an age for the pedestrian lights to change, then rode up the  main road for a couple of hundred metres before ducking left onto a quieter back street.

Just as I turned I heard something whiz past, just behind me. I turned and saw the blue car. There was a guy hanging out the back window holding a heavy chain. I had turned the instant he has swung it at my back, narrowly avoiding serious injury.

I continued down the road, struggling to take in the scale of threat. This was serious. These guys weren't mucking about, they were prepared to do some real damage. Following that incident I have often wondered why. Why bother with an old white dude on a bike? Easy target, sure, but really why - there's no money in it, nothing to be gained. Of course its' simpler than that, by touching his car I had caused an offence, some kind of offence that had to be paid back to preserve respect. Because that's what being a man is all about.

Unluckily for me the traffic was very light. Usually the blue car would have been jammed up for minutes and I would be a mile way before they made the next light, but not today. And unforetunately I was so shocked by what had just about happened that I couldn't do anything but continue on my habitual route. I turned right again, onto a road parallel to the main road, though by now I was riding as fast as my single-speed could go. I had to get away, keep turning and not stop, that was my only chance of not getting caught.

I could hear the car now, turning a road up and knew that I couldn't go that way, but as I stared to turn away from the sound my chain fell off.

You don't have derraileurs on a single speed. No way of getting the chain back on. No way of getting away. I had moementum, but I was goign towards the sound of the car.

Just as I saw the car nudging around the corner I saw a couple of builders walking on the street. I had just enough momentum to flick up onto the footpath and catch them up, dropping my bike in front of them just as the blue car stopped about ten metres away and the driver got out.

I quickly told the builders that this guy was about to beat me up. I really thought the three men in the car were going to get out, get that chain, and give me a proper going over. Something that would have ended with me in hospital.  The builders looked at me as if they hadn't heard me, then said something to each other. Polish.

At least they were there. Perhaps if things got really bad they would step in. At least they would be witnesses.

The driver reached me. Pathetically I said 'It's a one way street mate...' as if there was a chance that some education was going to get me off the hook. Clearly it wasn't.

So the driver punched me in the face, quite a lot harder than the scooter rider, turned, got back into his car and drove off. Honour satisfied.

It was, considering the circumstances, a lucky escape, though it didn't feel like it. The punch hurt, of course, but it was the amount of effort they had gone too to track me down and the chain that had put the fear in me. That was somehow more upsetting than the punch.

I managed to fix the chain and ride to pick up Baxter but I was in streams of tears. Shock I guess. It was, all in all, the worst five minutes I have ever had on a bike. Actually it was the worst five minutes I have had in Londona.

I have played the event in my mind many times over the years. I have good 'body memory' and can remember road incidents decades old very clearly. The main problem was slipping the chain. If I could have kept moving then I would have been in a better place. I now have a protocol in place for similar events should they arise which involved exploiting the natural advantages of a bike in the city and your excellent knowledge of the environment.

1/ Stay on your bike, never stop to make you point. They don't care, they want to hurt you.
2/ Get onto the pavement and stay there, always moving. They can't ram you then. If they want a physical confrontation they will have to stop and get onto the pavement with you, by which time you can be fifty metres up the road.
3/ Go the wrong way on the pavement - if they are coming up behind you then turn back and go the other direction; this forces them to turn. Then turn again - you can buy time that way and they will get bored, or caught up in traffic.
4/ Even better go the wrong way, on the pavement, around the block, round and round until they get bored or you can plan your next move.
5/ Know the area - where are the cycle routes and pedestrian only walkways? Have a plan for getting off every road that you ride along.
6/ Assume they are crazy enough to chase you - plan the rest of your route accordingly.
7/ Main roads can be good for this - they tend to be slower and have more people around for safety. It's also easier to jump a light to get ahead, or duck away.
8/ Don't ride home until you know they are not following you - you don't want them to see where you live.

Since then I have, for all of the many comutting routes I ave had in London, imagined and planned escape or elude routes along every metre of the rides. Where are the curbs you can bunny hop easily? Where does that little path go to, can I make an escape down it? I will stop for a minute and check and then refernce that with a map. the thing is not to know just the route it's to know everything around the route too.

Paranoid?

It's one thing to have car lurch at you. At an adrenal, primitive level cars are like out of control rhinos heading at you and they invoke the same reaction in cyclists as they would in real life - fear, adrenelin, anger. It's another whole level of fear to have someone riding that rhino, carrying a spear and intent on hurting you.

I'm calling that prepared.

And I use a camera now, mounted on the bars because, for some reason, people take exception to helmet cameras thinking that it's somehow a affront to their liberty and illegal. It isn't. I don't need permission to film the road and traffic.

Most of all I simply stopped any forms of confrontation on the road. I go in friendly now, if I feel I must talk to a motorist. Most of the time I just ignore them and ride very very defensively indeed. The first rule of commuting is to reach the end alive. A minute here or there waiting for a situation to pass, or the seconds of delay caused by being cautious are worth it.

After that last incident I took down one of the builders phone numbers with a great deal of difficulty, he had no english, but without the number plate it was an empty exercise. I didn't report it.

What I did do was get rid of that frame as soon as I could. No more single speeds - I wanted a sharp handling very fast bike again. I saw that as an essential safety feature. Had I been on the Kinesis I most likely would have been fine. As it was I got on that the morning after the incident and felt a lot better.

Since then I have been assertive on the road but never abusive and I never lash out. I still have a body memory of the sound of that chain whistling behind me. You can't control what everyone does, but you can minimise the number of incidents and their impact though choice of route, good planning and managing your own reactions. That is mature city riding.









  
